# EnsembleCNV CNV calling pipeline, Minimal Version

This is a minimal verion of ensembleCNV, a CNV calling pipeline that
uses three different callers. The results are returned in a standardized manner. 

Original manuscript:

Zhongyang Zhang, Haoxiang Cheng, Xiumei Hong, Antonio F. Di Narzo, Oscar Franzen, Shouneng Peng, Arno Ruusalepp, Jason C. Kovacic, Johan LM Bjorkegren, Xiaobin Wang, Ke Hao (2019) EnsembleCNV: An ensemble machine learning algorithm to identify and genotype copy number variation using SNP array data. Nucleic Acids Research, doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz068

## Table of Contents

- [Installation](#installation)
- [Data](#data)
- [1 Initial call](#1-initial-call)
  - [Prepare chromosome-wise LRR and BAF matrices for CNV genotyping](#prepare-chromosome-wise-lrr-and-baf-matrices-for-cnv-genotyping)
  - [Prepare data for individual CNV callers](#prepare-data-for-individual-cnv-callers)
- [2 Batch effect](#2-batch-effect)
  - [PCA on raw LRR data](#pca-on-raw-lrr-data)
  - [PCA on summary statistics](#pca-on-summary-statistics)
- [3 Create CNVR](#3-create-cnvr)

## Installation

### Requirements

- R (3.3.1+) (https://www.r-project.org/) with the following packages:
  - cowplot (0.9.2+)
  - data.table (1.10.4-3+)
  - dplyr (0.7.4+)
  - ggplot2 (3.0.0+)
  - gridExtra (2.3+)
  - mclust (5.4+)
  - mixtools (1.1.0+)
  - modeest (2.1+)
  - optparse (1.3.2+)
  - pheatmap (1.0.8+)
  - plyr (1.8.4+)
  - RColorBrewer (1.1-2+) 
  - Rcpp (0.12.17+)
  - RcppArmadillo (0.7.500.0.0+)
  - tibble (1.4.2+)
- Perl (5.10.1+) (https://www.perl.org/)

Note: 

- The scripts of ensembleCNV have been developed and tested on [Minerva](https://hpc.mssm.edu/), a high-performance multi-node linux cluster (CentOS 6.9) wtih LSF (Load Sharing Facility). Part of the scripts used for job submission to parallelize the computation needs to be adjusted to your specific computational environment (see below sections [CNV genotyping for each CNVR](#4-cnv-genotyping-for-each-cnvr) and [Boundary refinement](#5-boundary-refinement)). Running the whole pipeline on a Linux laptop/desktop may be possible, but may take much longer time and sometimes may be computationally prohibitive, especially for large projects with thousands to tens of thousands of samples (i.e., typical GWAS data).

- Please be advised that ensembleCNV is designed to detect and genotype CNVs on a relatively large cohort usually consisting of at least a few hundred samples. In particular, the steps [creating CNVR](#3-create-cnvr), [CNV genotyping](#4-cnv-genotyping-for-each-cnvr), and [boundary refinement](#5-boundary-refinement) require relatively large sample size to achieve a reasonable reproducibility and accuracy. Results generated from only a few samples are not valid.  

- Each of the 3 third-source CNV callers has its own installation requirements. Please refer to their specific installation instructions: [iPattern](https://github.com/HaoKeLab/ensembleCNV/tree/master/01_initial_call/run_iPattern), [PennCNV](https://github.com/HaoKeLab/ensembleCNV/tree/master/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV) and [QuantiSNP](https://github.com/HaoKeLab/ensembleCNV/tree/master/01_initial_call/run_QuantiSNP).

### Installation

```sh
git clone https://github.com/HaoKeLab/ensembleCNV
```
The scripts in the installation folder `ensembleCNV` are organized step by step, with scripts for each step located in each individual subfolder. For a new project, we recommend the user make a copy of the original installation folder `ensembleCNV` in the working directory and keep the folder structure to organize the data and analysis workflow. We prepared a shell script for creating new project.
```sh
ENSEMBLECNV=</path/to/ensembleCNV>
cd $ENSEMBLECNV
chmod +x create_new_project.sh

WKDIR=</path/to/working_directory>
./create_new_project.sh $WKDIR
```

Please go through the detailed step-by-step instructions as follows when using ensembleCNV for the first time. For your reference, we also prepared a template script [run_ensembleCNV_template.sh](https://github.com/HaoKeLab/ensembleCNV/blob/master/run_ensembleCNV_template.sh) to facilitate running the whole pipeline.

## Data

### Final report

The raw data comes from the [final report](http://jp.support.illumina.com/content/dam/illumina-support/documents/documentation/software_documentation/genomestudio/genomestudio-2-0/genomestudio-genotyping-module-v2-user-guide-11319113-01.pdf) generated by Illumina [GenomeStudio](https://support.illumina.com/array/array_software/genomestudio.html). We recommend the users follow the [protocol](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25321409) to process the raw Illumina SNP array data with GenomeStudio. With the GenomeStudio, the exported final report text file is supposed to include at minimum the following 10 columns:
  - Sample ID
  - SNP Name 
  - Chr
  - Position
  - Allele 1 - Forward (or Allele 1 - Top) (used by iPattern)
  - Allele 2 - Forward (or Allele 2 - Top) (used by iPattern)
  - X (used by iPattern)
  - Y (used by iPattern)
  - Log R Ratio (used by PennCNV, QuantiSNP, and ensembleCNV)
  - B Allele Freq (used by PennCNV, QuantiSNP, and ensembleCNV)

### Sample table

The users need to prepare a project-specific tab-delimited sample table with `Sample_ID` and `Gender` information for each sample. Note: Please name the table header exactly as `Sample_ID` and `Gender`. For example,
```
Sample_ID Gender
sample1 Female
sample2 Male
sample3 Male
...
```
The gender information is required by QuanitSNP and iPattern rather than ensembleCNV. Such table may have been already prepared by the investigators (i.e., this is typically the case for GWAS). Another option is to export the sample table with GenomeStudio, which has a build-in function to estimate gender if gender information is not provided by the investigators. Please refer to [GenomeStudio manual](http://jp.support.illumina.com/content/dam/illumina-support/documents/documentation/software_documentation/genomestudio/genomestudio-2-0/genomestudio-genotyping-module-v2-user-guide-11319113-01.pdf) for details.

### Centromere position

We have prepared a tab-delimited table [centromere_hg19.txt](https://github.com/HaoKeLab/ensembleCNV/blob/master/example/example_create_CNVR/data/centromere_hg19.txt) for the centromere position (hg19) of each chromosome. Centromere positions for other assemblies can be extracted from corresponding Chromosome Band tables from UCSC genome browser at [here](https://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgTables).

### Duplicate pairs [optional]

If duplicated samples (either technical duplicates or monozygotic twins) are available, we can use the information for quality control and deciding the GQ score threshold in the step [performance assessment](#6-performance-assessment). Please refer to the [manuscript](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz068) for details. We provdie an example table [duplicate_pairs.txt](https://github.com/HaoKeLab/ensembleCNV/blob/master/example/example_CNV_genotype/data/duplicate_pairs.txt). Note: Please name the table header exactly as `sample1.name` and `sample2.name`.

Before running the analysis, please put (or create symbolic link to) the final report file (e.g., named "final_report.txt"), sample table (exactly named as "Samples_Table.txt"), centromere position table (e.g., named "centromere_hg19.txt"), and duplicates table [optional] (exactly named as "duplicate_pairs.txt") in the folder `${WKDIR}/data`.

## 1 Initial call

The pipeline begins with running inividual CNV callers, including [iPattern](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/?term=21552272), [PennCNV](http://penncnv.openbioinformatics.org/en/latest/), and [QuantiSNP](https://sites.google.com/site/quantisnp/), to make initial CNV calls. Before that, the final report data needs to be converted into proper format required by ensembleCNV as well as inividual CNV callers.

### Prepare chromosome-wise LRR and BAF matrices for CNV genotyping

We provide [perl scripts](https://github.com/HaoKeLab/ensembleCNV/tree/master/01_initial_call/finalreport_to_matrix_LRR_and_BAF) to extract LRR and BAF information from final report, combine them across individuals and divide them by chromsomes. 


(1) Create LRR and BAF (tab delimited) matrices from final report
```sh
perl ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/finalreport_to_matrix_LRR_and_BAF/finalreport_matrix_LRR_BAF.pl \
${WKDIR}/data/final_report.txt \
${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/finalreport_to_matrix_LRR_and_BAF
```
Note: 
- This perl script is designed to process a final report file with multiple samples. Although the code can accommodate a final report file with one or a few samples, the output files in the case are not meaningful for downstream analysis. The script will issue a warning if sample size is too small for subsequent steps.

- In addtion to creating LRR and BAF matrices, the perl script also screens the whole final report file and performs sanity check. It will stop and report errors if there is any discripancy in the number of probes between samples. It will issue warnings if any columns required by ensembleCNV or the three CNV callers are missing.

(2) Tansform tab-delimited text file to .rds format for quick loading in R
```sh
Rscript ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/finalreport_to_matrix_LRR_and_BAF/transform_from_tab_to_rds.R \
--input ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/finalreport_to_matrix_LRR_and_BAF \
--output ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/finalreport_to_matrix_LRR_and_BAF/RDS \
--startChr <INT> \ ## default: 1
--endChr <INT>  ## default: 22
```
The parameters `--startChr` and `--endChr` indicate the range of chromosomes (1 <= startChr <= endChr <= 22) to be processed. When `--startChr` and `--endChr` are not specified, all the autosomal chromosomes (i.e., Chr 1 ~ 22) will be processed by default. If you are interested in CNVs in a particular chromosome, e.g., chr 3, set `--startChr 3 --endChr 3`.

Note: In current version, we focus on detecting and genotyping CNVs in autosomal chromosomes. Functionality for analyzing CNVs of sex chromosomes is part of our future development plans.

When finishing running the scripts, there will be two folders `LRR` and `BAF` created under the folder specified by `--output`. In `LRR` (`BAF`) folder, you will see LRR (BAF) matrices stored in `matrix_chr_*_LRR.rds` (`matrix_chr_*_BAF.rds`) for each chromosome respectively. In the matrix, each row corresponds to a sample while each column a SNP. The data will be later used for CNV genotyping for each CNVR.

In addition, a text file named "SNP_pos.txt" with `Name`, `Chr`, and `Position` information of each probe will be generated at `${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/finalreport_to_matrix_LRR_and_BAF` and used in downstream analysis.

### Prepare data for individual CNV callers

We provide [perl scripts](https://github.com/HaoKeLab/ensembleCNV/tree/master/01_initial_call/prepare_IPQ_input_file) to extract information from final report and convert the data into the formatted input files required by iPattern, PennCNV and QuantiSNP. The required columns in final report will be retrived for each CNV caller and split into individual tab-delimited text files, each for one sample. 

#### iPattern
```sh
perl ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/prepare_IPQ_input_file/finalreport_to_iPattern.pl \
-prefix ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_iPattern/data/ \
-suffix .txt \
${WKDIR}/data/final_report.txt
```

#### PennCNV
```sh
perl ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/prepare_IPQ_input_file/finalreport_to_PennCNV.pl \
-prefix ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/data/ \
-suffix .txt \
${WKDIR}/data/final_report.txt
```

#### QuantiSNP
```sh
perl ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/prepare_IPQ_input_file/finalreport_to_QuantiSNP.pl \
-prefix ${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_QuantiSNP/data/ \
-suffix .txt \
${WKDIR}/data/final_report.txt
```

To run each individual CNV caller, we provide complimentary scripts for [iPattern](https://github.com/HaoKeLab/ensembleCNV/tree/master/01_initial_call/run_iPattern), [PennCNV](https://github.com/HaoKeLab/ensembleCNV/tree/master/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV) and [QuantiSNP](https://github.com/HaoKeLab/ensembleCNV/tree/master/01_initial_call/run_QuantiSNP). We encourage users to consult with the original documents of these methods for more details. 


## 2 Batch effect

Two orthogonal signals can be used to identify batch effects in CNV calling: (i) Batch effects may be reflected in the first two or three PCs when principle component analysis (PCA) is applied on the raw LRR matrix. We randomly select 100,000 probes and apply PCA to the down-sampled matrix to save computational time. (ii) Along with CNV calls, the three detection methods generate sample-wise summary statistics, such as standard deviations (SD) of LRR, SD of BAF, wave factor in LRR, BAF drift, and the number of CNVs detected, reflecting the quality of CNV calls at the sample level.  Since these quantities are highly correlated among themselves and between methods, we also use PCA to summarize their information.  By examining the first two or three PCs visualized in scatter plots, we can identify sample outliers or batches that deviate from the majority of the normally behaved samples. 

Note: While isolated outliers should be excluded from downstream analysis, if batch effects are identified, the users need to re-normalize the samples within each outstanding batch with Genome Studio respectively. The initial CNV calling step with individual CNV callers need to be performed again on the updated data. The re-called CNVs will be combined with the remaining call set of good quality. Also, the chromosome-wise LRR and BAF matrices prepared for CNV genotyping need to be updated as done in the [initial step](#prepare-chromosome-wise-lrr-and-baf-matrices-for-cnv-genotyping).

### PCA on raw LRR data

This analysis is implemented in the following 3 steps.

(1) Randomly select 100,000 SNPs based on information from "SNP_pos.txt".
```sh
Rscript ${WKDIR}/02_batch_effect/PCA_on_LRR/step.1.down.sampling.R \
${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/finalreport_to_matrix_LRR_and_BAF/SNP_pos.txt \
${WKDIR}/02_batch_effect/PCA_on_LRR    ## path to snps.down.sample.txt
```

(2) Extract LRR values at the list of randomly selected SNPs across individuals from final report file generated by Genome Studio.
```sh
perl ${WKDIR}/02_batch_effect/PCA_on_LRR/step.2.LRR.matrix.pl \
${WKDIR}/02_batch_effect/PCA_on_LRR/snps.down.sample.txt \   ## the list of SNPs generated in step (1)
${WKDIR}/data/final_report.txt \                             ## generated by Genome Studio
${WKDIR}/02_batch_effect/PCA_on_LRR/LRR_matrix_for_PCA.txt   ## path to LRR_matrix_for_PCA.txt
```

(3) PCA on LRR matrix.
```sh
Rscript ${WKDIR}/02_batch_effect/PCA_on_LRR/step.3.LRR.PCA.R \
${WKDIR}/02_batch_effect/PCA_on_LRR/ \                       ## path to PCA results
${WKDIR}/02_batch_effect/PCA_on_LRR/LRR_matrix_for_PCA.txt   ## the LRR matrix generated in step (2)
``` 
When the analysis is finished, in the working directory, the first three PCs of all samples will be saved in tab-delimited text file (`LRR_PCA_res.txt`), as well as scatter plots of the first three PCs (`LRR_PCA_plots.png`). 

### PCA on summary statistics

Besides CNV calls, iPattern, PennCNV and QuantiSNP also generate 10 sample-level statistics: (a) SD of normalzied total intensity, and b) number of CNVs detected per sample from iPattern; (c) SD of LRR, (d) SD of BAF, (e) wave factor in LRR, (f) BAF drift, and (g) number of CNVs detected per sample from PennCNV; (h) SD of LRR, (i) SD of BAF, and (j) number of CNVs detected per sample from QuantiSNP. PCA can be performed in the follwoing 2 steps.

(1) Generate iPattern, PennCNV and QuantiSNP sample-level summary statistics.
```sh
Rscript ${WKDIR}/02_batch_effect/PCA_on_summary_stats/step.1.prepare.stats.R \
${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_iPattern/results \
${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/results \
${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_QuantiSNP/results/res \
${WKDIR}/02_batch_effect/PCA_on_summary_stats   ## summary statistics IPQ.stats.txt from iPattern, PennCNV and QuantiSNP results
```

(2) PCA on sample-level summary statistics.
```sh
Rscript ${WKDIR}/02_batch_effect/PCA_on_summary_stats/step.2.stats.PCA.R \
${WKDIR}/02_batch_effect/PCA_on_summary_stats   ## path to IPQ.stats.txt generated in step (1)
```
When the analysis is finished, in the working directory, the PCs of all samples will be saved in tab-delimited text file (`IPQ_stats_PCA_res.txt`), as well as scatter plots of the first three PCs (`IPQ_stats_PCA_plots.png`). 


## 3 Create CNVR

We define copy number variable region (CNVR) as the region in which CNVs called from different individuals by different callers substantially overlap with each other. We model the CNVR construction problem as identification of cliques (a sub-network in which every pair of nodes is connected) in a network context, where (i) CNVs detected for each individual from a method are considered as nodes; (ii) two nodes are connected when the reciprocal overlap between their corresponding CNV segments is greater than a pre-specified threshold (e.g. 30%); (iii) a clique corresponds to a CNVR in the sense that, for each CNV (node) belonging to the CNVR (clique), its average overlap with all the other CNVs of this CNVR is above a pre-specified threshold (e.g. 30%). The computational complexity for clique identification can be dramatically reduced in this special case, since the CNVs can be sorted by their genomic locations and the whole network can be partitioned by chromosome arms – CNVs from different arms never belong to the same CNVR. More details can be found in the [manuscript](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkz068).

The algorithm is implemented in the following two steps.

(1) Extract CNV information from individual calls made by iPattern, PennCNV and QuantiSNP
```sh
Rscript ${WKDIR}/03_create_CNVR/step.1.CNV.data.R \
${WKDIR}/03_create_CNVR \
${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_iPattern/results/<project_name>_all_calls.txt \  ## <project_name> used in iPattern analysis
${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_PennCNV/results/CNV.PennCNV_new.txt \
${WKDIR}/01_initial_call/run_QuantiSNP/results/quantisnp.cnv \
${WKDIR}/data/Samples_Table.txt
```
After finishing this step, three tab-delimited tables for each respective method, `cnv.ipattern.txt`, `cnv.penncnv.txt`, and `cnv.quantisnp.txt`, will be generated with such fields as `Sample_ID`, `chr`, `posStart`, `posEnd`, `CNV_type`, etc. These files will be used as input in the following step (2).


